Reference docs for new configuration (#1166)
osohq/oso: docs/content/any/reference/polar/polar-syntax.md

## Rules

> Rules allow you to express conditional statements ("**if** this **then** that").

Author: maybe but this entire section is not great so I think we should take it as a follow-up, i'll add to notion

```

An inline query is only valid at the beginning of a line.

### Rule Types

A rule type is simply the declaration of a rule that specifies the rule's name, arguments and argument types or values.
Rule types have the same syntax as rule head, and are preceded by the keyword `type`.

For example,

```polar
type has_permission(actor: Actor, action: String, resource: Resource);
```

The above rule type specifies that any rule with the name `has_permission` must have three arguments, where the first argument matches `Actor`, the second argument matches `String`, and the third argument matches `Resource`.

Argument matching is determined in the same way that matching is determined for rule evaluation. See [Patterns and Matching](#patterns-and-matching).

Rule types are optional. If a rule type exists with the same name as a rule, then the rule must match that type or else an error will be thrown at policy load-time.

You can find a reference for built-in rule types [here](reference/polar/builtin_rule_types).

> ## Actor and Resource Blocks

Author: Everything below here could be broken into a separate page specifically about blocks, which was the original plan, and we could link to that page from a brief overview here.

```

An inline query is only valid at the beginning of a line.

### Rule Types

> A rule type specifies the _shape_ of a rule — its arity and, optionally, the type of each of its arguments. If a rule type exists for `has_permission()`, then all `has_permission()` rules must conform to the rule type.

Reviewer: since you didn't want to use 'arity' in user-facing docs

```suggestion
A rule type specifies the _shape_ of a rule — the number of arguments it has and, optionally, the type of each argument. If a rule type exists for `has_permission()`, then all `has_permission()` rules must conform to the rule type.
```

```

An inline query is only valid at the beginning of a line.

> ### Rule Types

Author: Line 623

> A rule type is simply the declaration of a rule that specifies the rule's name, arguments and argument types or values.

Author: We're not using "arity" in user-facing docs. Not sure that `_shape_` is very descriptive.

```suggestion
A rule type is simply the declaration of a rule that specifies the rule's name, number of arguments and, optionally, the expected type/value of each argument.
```

> A rule type is simply the declaration of a rule that specifies the rule's name, arguments and argument types or values.

Reviewer: noted re: 'arity'

The main problem I have is with the first clause — I don't agree that "[a] rule type is simply the declaration of a rule".

Open to alternatives to "shape", but I think my suggestion is a more accurate description

> A rule type is simply the declaration of a rule that specifies the rule's name, arguments and argument types or values.

Author: Why is it not the declaration of a rule?

> A rule type is simply the declaration of a rule that specifies the rule's name, arguments and argument types or values.

Author: I don't feel that strongly just gonna take the suggestion

```polar
# Actor block
actor User {}

# Resource block
resource Repository {}
```

In the above example, `User` and `Repository` must be registered application types.

Inside of a block, you can declare [permissions](#permission-declarations), [roles](#role-declarations), and [relations](#relation-declarations) and write [shorthand rules](#shorthand-rules).

A more complete block looks like this:

{{< code codeLang="polar">}}
resource Repository {
  ### Permission, role, and relation declarations ###
  permissions = ["read", "push"];  # permissions that can be granted for the actor or resource
  roles = ["contributor", "maintainer", "admin"];  # roles that can be assigned for the actor or resource
  relations = { parent: Organization };  # relations to other actors/resources

  ### Shorthand Rules ###
  "read" if "contributor"  # "contributor" role grants the "read" permission
  "push" if "maintainer"  # "member" role grants the "read" permission
  "maintainer" if "admin"  # "admin" role grants the "maintainer" role
}
{{< /code >}}
<!--
TODO: should we add the data-linking rules here too? I'm thinking in case
someone just copies and pastes this whole thing

> -->

Author: Trying to avoid an overwhelming amount of code that distracts from the main point.

Once you have declared a block, you can use the built-in [Actor and Resource
specializers](#actor-and-resource-specializers) to match all declared actor and
resource types.

### Permission Declarations

You can specify the permissions that are available for an actor or resource type using the following syntax:

{{< code codeLang="polar" hl_lines="2">}}
resource Repository {
  permissions = ["read", "push"];
}
{{< /code >}}

Permissions are always Strings. You must declare permissions in order to use them in [shorthand rules](#shorthand-rules).

### Role Declarations

You can specify the roles that are available for an actor or resource type using the following syntax:

{{< code codeLang="polar" hl_lines="2">}}
resource Repository {
  roles = ["contributor", "maintainer", "admin"];
}
{{< /code >}}

Roles are always Strings. You must declare roles in order to use them in [shorthand rules](#shorthand-rules).

> In order to use roles, you must write at least one `has_role` rule that gets

Author: I don't think this is saying the same thing--trying to explain that it's a getter for Oso.

user-role assignments stored in your application. This rule takes the following
form:

```polar
has_role(actor: Actor, name: String, resource: Resource) if ...
```

For example,

```polar
# User-role assignment hook - required when using roles
has_role(user: User, name: String, repo: Repository) if

>   # Look up user-role assignments from application, e.g.

Author: Why remove? Trying to show that the code below is an example

  role in user.roles and
  role.repo_id = repo.id;
```

The `name` argument corresponds to the role names in the declaration list. The

> `has_role` rule must handle every declared role name.

Reviewer: might be worth explaining the failure mode if the `has_role` rule doesn't handle every declared role name

### Relation Declarations

> You can specify relations from one actor/resource type to another using the following syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify relations between actor/resource types using the following syntax:
```

{{< code codeLang="polar" hl_lines="2">}}
resource Repository {

>   relations = {parent: Organization};

Reviewer: we space like this elsewhere (GitClub policies, RBAC guide)
```suggestion
  relations = { parent: Organization };
```

}
{{< /code >}}

> Relations are `{key: value}` pairs where the key is the relation name, and the value is the type of the related object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relations are `key: value` pairs where the key is the relation name and the value is the type of the related object.
```

Related object types must also be declared in resource or actor blocks.

In order to use relations, you must write a `has_relation` rule that gets relationship data from your application. This rule takes the following form:

```polar
has_relation(subject: Resource/Actor, name: String, object: Resource/Actor) if ...
```

The `object` argument is the resource or actor type on which the relation was declared.
In the example above, the object type is `Repository` and the subject type is `Organization`.

For example,

```polar
# Relation hook - required when using relations
has_relation(parent_org: Organization, "parent", repo: Repository) if
  # Look up parent-child relation from application, e.g.
  parent_org = repo.org;
```

`has_relation` rules must be defined for every declared relation.

### Shorthand Rules

> Shorthand rules are shortened rules that you can define inside actor and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shorthand rules are concise rules that you can define inside actor and
```

resource blocks using declared permissions, roles, and relations.

For example,

```polar
resource Repository {
  permissions = ["read", "push"];
  roles = ["contributor", "maintainer"];
  relations = { parent: Organization };

  # Shorthand rules without relations
  "read" if "contributor";  # "contributor" role grants "read" permission
  "push" if "maintainer";  # "maintainer" role grants "push" permission
  "contributor" if "maintainer";  # "maintainer" role grants "contributor" role

  # Shorthand rules with relations
  "admin" if "owner" on "parent"  # "owner" role on parent Organization grants the "admin" role
  "contributor" if "member" on "parent"  # "member" role on parent Organization grants "contributor" role
}
```

For shorthand rules to be evaluated by the Oso library, you must add the following rule to your policy:

```polar
allow(actor, action, resource) if has_permission(actor, action, resource);
```

This rule tells Oso to look for permissions that were granted through shorthand rules.

#### Shorthand Rules Without Relations

A shorthand rule has the basic form:

```polar
[result] if [condition];
```

> Where `"result"` and `"condition"` can be [permissions](#permission-declarations) or [roles](#role-declarations) that were declared inside the same block.

Author: Not documenting relations other than `"parent"` for now.

  "push" if "maintainer";  # "maintainer" role grants "push" permission
  "contributor" if "maintainer";  # "maintainer" role grants "contributor" role
}
```

#### Shorthand Rules With Relations

If you have [declared relations](#relation-declarations) inside a block, you can also write shorthand rules of this form:

```polar
[result] if [condition] on [relation];
```

where `result` and `condition` can be permissions or roles, and `relation` can be a relation.

This form is used to grant results based on conditions on a related resource or
actor. This form is commonly used with `"parent"` relations.

For example,

```polar
resource Repository {
  roles = ["contributor", "maintainer"];
  relations = { parent: Organization };

  "admin" if "owner" on "parent"  # "owner" role on parent Organization grants the "admin" role
  "contributor" if "member" on "parent"  # "member" role on parent Organization grants "contributor" role
}
```

### Shorthand Rule Expansion

Shorthand rules are expanded to full Polar rules when they are loaded. The semantics of this expansion are as follows.

#### Expansion without relation

```polar
$x if $y;

> => rule1(actor: Actor, $x, resource: $Type) if rule2(actor, $y, resource);

Author: Since that doesn't impact the functionality, don't think it's worth the extra potential confusion.

For example,

```polar
# Shorthand rule
resource Repository {
  permissions = ["read"];
  roles = ["contributor"];

  "read" if "contributor";
}

# Expanded rule
#                            "read"                        if                 "contributor"           ;
#                              \/                                                  \/
has_permission(actor: Actor, "read", resource: Repository) if has_role(actor, "contributor", resource);
```

# Expansion with relation

```polar
$x if $y on $z;
=> rule1(actor: Actor, $x, resource: $Type) if rule2(actor, $y, related) and has_relation(related, $z, resource);
```

where `rule1`, `rule2`, and `relation` are the expansions of `$x`, `$y`, and `$z` respectively.

The expansion of `$x` to `rule1` and `$y` to `rule2` follow the same semantics as expansion without relation above.
`$z` must always be a [declared relation](#relation-declarations) in the enclosing block.
The `has_relation` rule is necessary in order to access the `related` object that `rule2` references.
This expansion shows why it is necessary to define `has_relation` rules for every declared relation.

> For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

```polar
resource Repository {
  roles = ["admin"];
  relations = {parent: Organization};

  "admin" if "owner" on "parent";
}

#                      "admin"                        if                 "owner"            on                        "parent"          ;
#                        \/                                                \/        /------|-----------------\         \/
has_role(actor: Actor, "admin", resource: Repository) if has_role(actor, "owner", related) and has_relation(related, "parent", resource);
```

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> <!-- There are three kinds of shorthand rules:
> OLD
> ---
> ### Built-in `Actor` and `Resource` specializers
> 
> Once you have declared a block, you can use the built-in `Actor` and `Resource` specializers
> to match all declared actor and resource types.
> 
> E.g., `allow(actor: Actor, action, resource: Resource) if ...` will only match
> when called with instances of `MyActor` and `MyResource` in the above example.
> 
> 1. Grant a permission with a role.
> 
> ```polar
> [permission] if [role];
> ```
> This rule says that an actor has `permission` on the resource if they have `role` for the same resource, e.g.
> ```polar
> resource Repository {
>   permissions = ["read"];
>   roles = ["contributor"];
> 
>   "read" if "contributor";
> }
> ```
> 
> 2. Grant a role with another role.
> 
> ```polar
> [roleA] if [roleB];
> ```
> This rule says that an actor has `roleA` on the resource if they have `roleB` for the same resource, e.g.
> 
> ```polar
> resource Repository {
>   roles = ["contributor", "maintainer"];
> 
>   "contributor" if "maintainer";
> }
> ``` -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
